I want to introduce you to some very
wise kids that I've known the first I
want to introduce you to a camel this is
Cathy a therapy camel visiting one of
our young patients in her room which is
pretty magical a friend of mine raises
camels at his ranch in a Santa Cruz
Mountains he has about eight of them and
he started 30 years ago because he
thought horses were too mundane John is
and out-of-the-box thinker which
explains why the two of us have been
such good friends all of our lives over
the years I've convinced him to shuttle
those sweet prairie beasts up to hang
out with our sick kids from time to time
talking to John I was surprised to learn
that camels have an average life
expectancy of 40 to 50 years the life
expectancy of many of the children with
no my work is less than a year this is a
picture of the George Marc Children's
House the first pediatric palliative
respite care center to open in the
United States I founded it in 2004 after
years of working as a psychologist on
pediatric intensive care units
frustrated with the undignified death
that so many children experienced and
their families had to endure because I
sat with families who children were at
the end of their lives
I was acutely aware of our surroundings
while the elevated train rumbled
overhead on its track quite literally
the room reverberate it with each
passing train car the lights on a ward
were fluorescent and too bright monitors
beep as did the elevator
noisy announcing its arrival these
families were experiencing some of the
most excruciating moments of their lives
and I so wanted them to
a more peaceful place in which to say a
last goodbye to their young daughters
and sons surely I saw there must be a
better spot than a hospital intensive
care unit for children at the end of
their lives our children's house is calm
and nurturing it's a place where
families can stay together to enjoy
quality time with their children many of
whom are there for respite stays some
with repeated visits over span of many
years we call those kids our frequent
fliers rather than the bright noisy
quarters of the hospital their rooms are
calm and comfortable with actual living
spaces for the families a sanctuary of
garden and a wonderful outdoor
playground with special structures for
children with physical limitations this
sweet baby Lars came to us directly from
a hospital intensive care unit imagine
hearing the heartbreaking news that none
of us would ever want to hear his
parents had been told that Lars had a
brain anomaly that would keep him from
ever swallowing walking talking or
developing and mentally recognizing what
little chance he had for survival his
parents chose to focus on the quality of
time that they could spend together they
moved into one of our family apartments
and treasured each day that they had
which were far too few bars this life
was brief to be sure we're weeks but it
was calm and comfortable he went on
hikes with his parents the time that he
spent in the pool with our aquatic
therapist lessened the seizures he was
experiencing and helped him to sleep at
night his family had a peaceful place in
which to go to celebrate his life
and mourn his death this been five years
since loris was with us and in that time
his family has welcomed a daughter and
another son they are such a powerful
testament to the
of outcome that specialized children's
hospice care can create their baby's
physical discomfort was well-managed
giving all of them the gift of time to
be together in a beautiful place I'm
going to talk to you now about the
elephant rather than the camel in the
room very few people want to talk about
death and even fewer about children's
death loss of a child especially for
those of us who have our own children is
frightening more than frightening
paralyzing debilitating impossible but
what I've learned is that children don't
stop dying just because we the adults
can't comprehend the injustice of
loosing and what's more if we can be
brave enough to face the possibility of
death even among the most innocent we
gain an unparalleled kind of wisdom take
crystal for example she was one of the
first children to come for care after we
opened our doors she was knowing when
she arrived and her neurologist expected
that she might live another two weeks
she had an inoperable brain tumor and
her decline had really accelerated and
week before she came to us after
settling into a room dressed entirely in
pink and lavender surrounded by the
Hello Kitty accessories that she loved
she spent the next several days winning
over the hearts of every staff member
bit by bit
her condition stabilized and then to our
astonishment she actually improved there
were a variety of factors that
contributed to Crystal's improvement
which we later came to call the gorge
mark bump a lovely not uncommon
phenomenon where children outlive the
prognosis of their illnesses
if they're outside of the hospital the
calmer atmosphere of her surroundings
tasty meals that were fixed often to
accommodate her requests the resident
pets the therapy dog and rabbit spent
lots of cozy time with Krystal after she
had been with us for about a week she
called her grandmother and she said gee
I'm staying in a great big house and
there's room for you to come to and
guess what you don't have to bring any
quarters because the washer and dryer
are free crystals grandma soon arrived
from out of town and they spent the
remaining four months of Crystal's life
enjoying very special days together some
days were special because Krystal was
outside in her wheelchair sitting by the
phone for a little girl who had spent
most of the year earlier in a hospital
bed being outside counting hummingbirds
made for an amazing time with her
grandma and lots of laughter other days
were special because of the activities
that our Child Life specialists created
for her Krystal strung beads and made
jewelry for everybody in the house she
painted a pumpkin to help decorate for
Halloween she spent many excited days
planning her tenth birthday which of
course none of us thought she would ever
see all of us were people was for the
occasion and Krystal as you can see
Queen four day wore a sparkly tiara one
hot morning I arrived at work and
Krystal and her partner in crime charlie
greeted me with some help they had set
up a lemonade and cookie stand outside
the front door a very strategic location
I asked Krystal the price of the cookie
that I had selected and she said three
dollars
I said that seemed a bit high for one
cookie it was small I know she
acknowledged for the grin but I'm worth
it
and therein lie the words of wisdom of a
young girl his brief life forever
impacted mine crystallized was it and
shouldn't every child whose life is
shortened by a horrific illness be with
it together all of us today can offer
that same specialized care that crystal
receives by recognizing the children's
respite and hospice care is a critical
component missing from our healthcare
landscape it's also interesting to note
that we are able to provide this care at
about one-third of the cost of a
hospital intensive care unit and our
families don't see a bill we're ever
grateful to the supporters who believe
in this important work that we're doing
the truth is that my colleagues and I
and the parents and other family members
who get to experience this special
wisdom are in a unique position there
are only two freestanding pediatric
hospices in the United States although
I'm happy to report that based on our
model there are 18 others under various
stages of development
still most of the children who die in
the United States every year die in
hostel rooms surrounded by beeping
machines and anxious exhausted adults
who have no other option but to say
goodbye under those harsh institutional
lights and among virtual strangers
for comparison's sake the United Kingdom
which is a country with about one-fifth
the population of the United States and
about half the size of the state of
California has 54 hospice and respite
sooners why is that I've asked myself
that question obviously many times my
best guess is that Americans with our
positive can-do attitude hold the
expectation that our medical care system
will fix it even though it may be a
childhood illness for which there is no
cure we go to extraordinary measures to
keep children alive when in fact the
greatest kindness that we might give
them would be a peaceful pain-free
end-of-life the transition from cure to
care remains a challenging one for many
hospital physicians whose training has
really done about saving lives not about
gently guiding a patient to the end of
life the dad of a sweet baby for whom we
cared at the end of her life certainly
captured this dichotomy when he
reflected that there are a lot of people
to help you bring an infant into the
world but very few to help you assure a
baby out so what is the magic ingredient
in George Marc the complex medical
diagnosis that bring our young patients
to us meaning that their lives have
often been restricted some to a hospital
bed for long periods of time others to
wheelchairs still others to intensive
courses of chemotherapy or rehab we make
a practice of ignoring those limitations
our default answer is yes and our
default question is
why not that's why we took a young boy
who wasn't going to live for another
baseball season to Game five of the
World Series that's why we have a talent
show put on by the staff and kids for
family and friends who wouldn't be
enchanted by a young boy playing a piano
piece with his feet because his arms
were atrophied that's why we have a prom
every year it's pretty magical
we started prom after hearing a dad
lament that he would never pin a
boutonniere on his son's tuxedo lapel
the weeks before the dance the house is
in a flurry and I don't know who's more
excited the staff or the kids the night
of the event involves rides and vintage
cars a walk on a red carpet into the
great room a terrific DJ and a
photographer at the ready to capture
pictures of these attendees and their
families at the end of the evening this
year one of our young delightful teenage
girls Caitlin said to her mom that was
the best night of my whole life and
that's just the point to capture the
best days and nights to abolish
limitations to have your default answer
be yes and your default question be why
not ultimately life is too short whether
we live to be 85 years or just eight
trust me better yet trust them it's not
by pretending that death doesn't exist
that we keep the people especially the
little people that we love safe in the
end we can't control how long any of us
lives what we can control is how we
spend our days the spaces we create the
meaning and joy that we make we can
not change the outcome but we can change
the journey isn't it time to recognize
that children deserve nothing less than
our most uncompromising bravery and our
wildest imagination
thank you
[Applause]